# The Controversy of Project Nightingale: Patient Privacy in a New Age of Big Data and Machine Learning
In this document, I provide an overview of two different viewpoints regarding "Project Nightingale,"a collaborative effort between Google and U.S. healthcare system Ascension that sought to leverage AI and machine learning to improve the accessibility of patient records.

## Article 1
Project Nightingale first gained public attention after an article called ["I'm the Google whistleblower. The medical data of millions of Americans is at risk"](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/nov/14/im-the-google-whistleblower-the-medical-data-of-millions-of-americans-is-at-risk) was published to The Guardian in November 2019. In the article, Anonymous (one of about 250 people working on Nightingale) not only brought to light this previously-unknown project, which involved the transfer of over 50 million Americans' private health data to Google Cloud, but also came out with numerous concerns about the security and privacy issues potentially being breached by Google and Ascension. Most worrisome to Anonymous was that patients were being entirely left in the dark regarding the use of their private information. Anonymous' increasing conviction that these patients deserved to have the chance to either opt in or out of the project was what finally culiminated in the publication of the article.

After a discussion of the lack of information provided not only to the patients, but even the employees themselves over the course of the project, Anonymous closes with a firm statement that uses of patients' data "must be clearly defined for all to see" going into the future, and that "full HIPAA compliance must be enforced" so that third parties can only gain access to the data with public consent. Further, after the story on Project Nightingale was brought to public attention, a federal inquiry was launched to determine whether HIPAA protections had been followed by Google and Ascension. Clearly, the article achieved its purpose of creating an open debate about transparency and big data, an emerging field that will only require more clearly-defined boundaries going into the future as AI and machine learning ventures continue.


## Article 2
In his article ["Who Benefits from Google’s Project Nightingale?"](https://nas021.medium.com/who-benefits-from-googles-project-nightingale-96cb24752599), Neal Sklar both acknowledges the data controversy but also delves into the project's promising improvements to healthcare. First and foremost, Project Nightingale provides a centralized database of patient information that is easily and readily accessible to healthcare providers. Doctors and nurses would simply need to examine the patient and input their data into a computer in order for the Nightgale system to immediately suggest numerous viable treatment plans and tests, based on the analysis of millions upon millions of patient data. With machine learning, the project has the potential to "detect trends and patterns in diseases that humans wouldn't have found by themselves," which is the idea that initially led to the project's development itself. This capability would  mean that Project Nightingale could have the potential to save countless lives, urging one to consider that although the data was transferred to Google without consent, it is being used for a noble cause.

Secondly, the project's advanced machine learning abilities have the potential to improve healthcare providers' understanding of effective treatments and procedures for typically underrepresented minority populations. This would come into play if, let's say, a provider did not have much experience with a certain population due to the typical demographic under their care. In that case, the provider could then access the vast patient data in the Cloud in order to make a more accurate, relevant judgement of what the patient needs. All in all, the controversy of Project Nightingale raises important questions about the usage of data by tech giants such as Google, and begs for the consideration of both pros and cons in regards to new technological ventures such as AI and machine learning.